before we jump into the technical details of how note works,
Just sit back and relax for a minute.
Here.
We're going to go over the history of no Js from conception in 2009 to the present day.
It's a fascinating story,
and if you're a tech history buffer,
just curious where all this came from.
I know you'll love it.
It's also important to the understanding of why node is used.
The weight is why there's so much current emphasis on NPM modules and frameworks.
Here we go.
In March 2011 a video began circulating on YouTube and being emailed from one developer toe
another.
In the video,
a scraggly twentysomething named Ryan Dahl is giving a lecture to a small group at a San
Francisco PHP meet up about a new way of running Java script.
On the server,
he said he had packaged up Chrome's V eight runtime so that it could interpret JavaScript
server side on any UNIX like machine.
And then he had added some useful AP eyes on.
He was calling his creation node Js.
Eventually,
this video would garner hundreds of thousands of views and helped propel note into the
spotlight for many developers,
myself included.
The story of node started when we first watched that video in the summer or fall of 2011
but what seemed to so many of us is the beginning was actually far from it.
Ryan Dahl had authored Node two years earlier in 2009 and had been giving presentations at
meet ups,
conferences and elsewhere since then.
Ryan had been node steadfast evangelist for years at that point,
but the going had not been easy.
His first presentation shortly after authoring the framework,
was given at a Javascript centric conference in Europe in 2009 and it ended in a standing
ovation for Ryan.
But since then,
the broader programming community hadn't been quite so welcoming.
At first,
the community just ignored Note.
The original hacker news threat announcing Node received zero comments and only got eight
points.
If you know anything about hacker news,
that not exactly of overwhelming response once people did start paying attention to it,
the response wasn't particularly charitable towards the project.
As one skeptical forum commenter wrote in 2009 what exactly is the driving force behind the
desire to do everything in JavaScript.
Is it just because we have a surplus of JavaScript programmers?
It doesn't seem to me that this task is particularly well suited to JavaScript.
As another said,
Well,
I think it's great that more and more developers are being exposed to boating network
applications using a sink io,
which I guess is a vented now via Know J.
S.
I think it's worthwhile to point out that the state of the art has moved well beyond these
kind of call back frameworks.
The reason is simple.
It sucks programming and callback patterns on serious large projects.
You end up with lots of routines that air six or seven callbacks chained together.
And don't forget to attach Eric Callbacks as well at each point.
And as another said,
I think JavaScript is a fine little language,
but I don't make my server side language decisions based on what happens to be in the
browser.
To think that a language required for use in such a constrained environment is just
coincidentally,
also the best language to use server side,
where people have been doing event best programming for decades,
seems unlikely.
It would be Aziz ridiculous,
asserting that we should all use postscript in the browser because that's a standard we've
been using in printers for the last 20 years.
As such,
Ryan was facing a decidedly uphill battle.
Though most full Stack developer has had to use JavaScript on the browser with regularity,
many were not comfortable with the idea of running it on the server.
Besides,
in 2009 there was already a hot new thing to embrace.
Ruby on,
rails to,
and every hipster worth his weight in avocado toast was on the ruby bandwagon back then.
They didn't need node.
They didn't want it.
But in 2010 as Ryan continued pounding the pavement evangelizing his creation,
his luck started to change.
First.
In January 2010 Isaac Schlueter created a package manager he called Ackley and PM,
the node package manager.
This allowed developers to share no Js modules,
a k A.
Packages with each other quite easily.
No longer did a deaf have to search through disparate projects hosted in various ways in
various programming languages to find the one that suited their needs and runtime.
Every package on NPM was structured in a way to make it usable in anyone else's No Js
project,
and each one was semantically version so that the user could manage their dependencies in a
predictable way.
It was also convenient with NPM.
There was no get cloning or sitting up.
Get sub modules.
Just add the dependency toe one list called a package of Jason Run one Command and PM
Install in Boo The library's living in your project now,
and it's available for use.
This practicality made node much more user friendly and allow developers to externalize the
time costs of bootstrapping.
Their projects are addressing bugs in their code.
One developer could tackle one issue,
Let's say,
integrating with a database while the other could tackle another,
integrating with an A P I.
And then they could share their code with each other.
This collaborative sharing model was an idea whose time had come,
and it greatly reduced the burden on each developer who attempted to build a project in
note.
After all,
in these early days,
note was not only unstable,
but it gave cryptic error messages when something went wrong.
The know J s a P I back then was nothing like the LTs releases.
We get to work with now and back then a developer might spend a huge part of their time
tracking down obscure bugs.
NPM made writing node much less isolating and much less frustrating.
When one engineer figured out how to solve a problem or build a feature in a way that
didn't throw convoluted error messages,
he could share that solution with everyone else.
And for everyone else.
That was one last bug that they had to hunt down on their own.
Another early days,
Boon for Node came from symbiosis or synergy,
with a small,
obscure database project that had been built around the same time is Node and was also
experimenting with V eight and was also being evangelized around the tech community at that
time.
Mongo dp In early 2009 there were a few entrance competing for the title of Ah no sequel
database of choice.
Couch DB,
reddest React and others were all independently trying to pitch potential use cases to
developers.
But they were all getting lukewarm reception.
Much of development world wasn't sold on the idea of no sequel.
At that time,
it was still a new idea,
and besides many Dev's already had their databases of choice.
Ruby on rails.
Folk tended to like post rests PHP developers used my sequel almost exclusively.
Still others used or coal or Microsoft sequel Server Or what have you?
Why would any pragmatic developer want to switch his tooling around to embrace a new DB,
especially one that worked in a way so completely different than anything they were used to
?
One that didn't even support sequel queries?
One that store data in a binary form of Jason Ah format that was largely unfamiliar to most
Debs and unsupported in many languages at that time,
even developers who routinely integrated with third party AP eyes had no use for Jason as
most AP eyes exposed themselves over XML or soap at that time.
But in the late two thousands,
the meteoric rise of social media sites started to change.
That AP eyes like Twitter's started being released and became wildly popular among
developers.
These AP eyes almost exclusively exposed themselves over rest with Jason.
So in the late two thousands,
any developer who wanted to integrate with social media AP eyes,
which was many of them had to become familiar with Jason and the languages and frameworks
they worked in had to begin supporting it.
So as social media sites grew in popularity and standardized things like Ole Off and Rest
the use of Jason AP,
I spread and soon most new public AP eyes were being released.
Rest feli with Jason.
So then Jason became everyone's problem.
And as more and more developers were fetching data in Jason,
the idea of and the attractiveness of a Jason based document store started to make sense to
them.
Fetching Jason documents from an A P I and storing them in a traditional columnar data
store like an rd bms took a lot of extra work.
You had to make sure there was a column for every key and sub key within the Jason document
.
And if the document change your schema headed changes well with ski Melis,
Jason document stores like Mongo,
developers face no such hurdles.
They could simply vetch adjacent document from an A p.
I send it to their DB,
as is no more flattening the object or translating it from common format to Jason object
and back again.
Mongo just made their lives easier,
but still working with Jason objects on the back end with a language like PHP or Java.
Ruby was still no picnic.
If the language didn't natively understand nested object structures and Jason Data types,
a developer had to manage to ideas of every Jason object in parallel the actual Jason
representation of the object as it might be stored in Mongo or might be fetched from an A P
I and the object structure that his language was presenting to him to allow him to
manipulate the data.
These mental hurdles were painful and mistakes were common.
Enter no Js since node was just JavaScript.
Jason,
which stands for JavaScript Object notation,
was in native construct.
Knowed represented the object format,
the keys,
values and nested objects in the same way as it was being represented in the D B and in the
external AP eyes the developer was integrating with So in note,
Mongo found a partner in arms,
though the projects weren't linked by any official doctrine.
By early 2010 their fates had become intertwined,
and they were both benefiting from the rise of Jason and Jason AP eyes.
Together,
the projects were doing much more than the sum of their parts apart.
They had major issues.
If a no Js dev wasn't using Mongo,
where would he send his Js objects for storage?
And if a mongo user wasn't using no Js,
how painful would it be to represent and manipulate the data objects within his language of
choice,
Mongo and Node solved each other's problems.
But unfortunately for Ryan Dahl,
by mid 2010 there was still significant resistance to know J.
S and many developers were openly skeptic,
if not hostile to the idea,
though that was beginning to thaw ever so slightly.
In July of 2010 Google,
the authors of the V eight run time that no Js is built on top of invited Ryan to come
speak for some of their staff,
is part of a lecture series on new technology.
But when the day came and Ryan approached the podium to speak,
even the Google employees who introduced him couldn't resist expressing his skepticism and
explaining how tenuous his support for her this no Js idea Waas.
In his opening remarks,
the employee exclaimed,
This guy is controversial!
When I first heard of the project,
I didn't get it.
Why is this guy trying to run Java script on the server when everyone else is trying to run
Java on the client.
The version of Node that Ryan presented that day was still bare bones and unstable,
but it was maturing,
paring it conceptually,
with mongo minutes appeal stronger,
and the package sharing by NPM made a project in node look less daunting for everyone
involved.
But working in node was still a lonely manual process.
At this point,
there were many libraries,
but no particularly popular frameworks,
the likes of which a full stack dev of average experience would need before they could
embrace note.
Fully.
Integrating with Mongo directly from node,
however,
was still a bit of a pain and required a significant amount of work as well as a low level
understanding of notes networking capabilities.
As you can see,
by mid 2010 node as a whole still needed a miracle if it was ever going to grab mainstream
appeal.
But over the next 12 months,
that miracle would materialize,
ushered in by a number of creative early adopters and unrelated third parties who built and
release projects one after another that turned node from a strange choice to the clear
choice for many developers.
In no particular order,
those projects were expressed Js,
angular mongoose and No Js for Windows.
The NBC framework,
aptly named Express Js,
was released in November 2010 by T.
J.
Holloway.
Chuck Express was in many ways,
no Js for the masses.
T J had abstracted away much of the cumbersome border plate that made Node so difficult to
get up to speed with,
and had somehow managed to create a set of very predictable and stable AP eyes on top of
nodes.
Unstable core for ruby on rails,
Developers,
especially Express,
was a game changer,
an NBC not too dissimilar from rails that would allow them to write JavaScript or,
if they wanted coffee script a new,
more ruby like language that easily transpired to drop a script and that many ruby on rails
developers were growing fond of so fond of.
In fact,
that coffee script would become standard on ruby and rails in 2011.
But in 2010 prior to that,
many early Ruby Debs were growing weary of ruby on rails but had nowhere else to go.
Express gave these developers an easy way to get their feet wet in a framework structure
they already understood.
Another key project released in February 2011 was monkeys and easy to use.
No Js driver for Mongo With Mongoose,
anyone could easily plug up Mongo to note within a few minutes rather than a few hours.
This made building Hello World projects and fund hackathon projects in node.
Ah,
lot more practical.
One more key development was on the front end,
not the back.
In October 2010 Google release angular,
the front end Web framework that dealt heavily with two way binding,
the act of sinking data objects represented on the client with those represented on the
server and in the database In angular,
Both Node and Mongo found their champion.
If a dead was working in angular,
it was so cumbersome toe work within back ends and DBS that didn't understand Jason that
the project would be very slow going,
but with no Js plus mongo plus mongoose that Jason objects represented on the front end
within angular could easily and intuitively be sink to the back end in the database,
with node and mongo by their sides embracing two way binding became a cinch.
And those developers who chose this stack quickly gained a competitive edge when building
real time applications.
And because of this advantage,
the so called mean stack was born mean stands for Mongo Express.
Angular,
No Js.
But it could just as easily stand for Mongoose Express.
Angular.
NPM,
I mean quickly became what lamp and R.
O.
R stacks had been to a previous generation of deaths.
Everything they needed to build the kind of applications that were demanded in their day
with relative ease for those building in raw no Js outside of the means deck node remain
cumbersome,
unstable and hard to debug.
These limitations were due in no small part to the fact that it was a one man project with
a loose association of contributors and no sponsoring entity or governing organization to
manage a facilitate the progress of the project.
In short,
to become,
as Ryan Dahl had said,
the next PHP node was going to need a corporate sponsor In a block post in November 2010
Dull explained the situation and introduced much of development community to a company
called Joint who had hired him and was purchasing the name and the trademark for node and
becoming the official steward of the project.
Giant stewardship of the project promised stability,
security and a scaled up development effort on node core and the tooling surrounding it and
within a year,
joint had delivered on this promise and gave the next boon to know J.
S.
In 2011 join in a partnership with Microsoft released Node version 0.6 point zero,
which included support for Windows opening Noto,
a much wider audience than just OS X and Linux space developers.
While many developers build software for Linux machines,
they did their local work on Windows machines,
and a Windows version of node was crucial to them adopting the platform and incorporating
it into their development cycle.
By the fall of 2011 around the time the video Ryan dollars March 2011 talk began
circulating heavily in development circles.
All of these developments express Js angular mongoose,
no jails for Windows they'd already taken place,
and thanks to giants governance,
the projects,
it was getting more stable and easier to use with every release.
Additionally,
Jason Ap eyes were spreading like wildfire,
making mean stacks in no Js in general much more attractive.
And nodes still had its creator and evangelist extraordinaire Ryan dull,
pounding the pavement all over the Bay Area and abroad,
spreading the gospel of note.
So by the end of 2011 all these forces had come together and manifested exactly the miracle
that node needed,
cementing its place as a force to be reckoned with and a top tier platform on which to
build real time applications,
traditional NBC's and everything else for the Modern Web.
From that time until today,
under Giants governance,
the No Js project grew and changed and largely predictable ways.
In 2012 Doll,
Step Aside and promoted Isaac Schlueter,
the creative NPM toe lead the note project instead.
He subsequently stepped down and promoted TJ Fontaine to take his place.
Then in 2015 due to a rift that have formed between groups of no developers,
some now calling their project ioo dot Js.
Instead of node,
governance of the project was taken out of giants hands and placed in a new neutral no Js
foundation.
This new organisational body allow all sides to come together,
steer the project and rejoined forces.
So the time of this writing no Js is still under the governance of the know J s foundation
.
No.
Its popularity has grown ever stronger since its early days,
though the faces associated with it have largely changed over time.
Early pioneers like T.
J.
Holloway Chuck have since moved on to other projects and platforms,
replaced by equally prolific developers like Cinder Saurus,
James Halladay,
Gay Subject Ideas Mani and Patraeus Crimmins.
The project reached a significant level of stability in 2015 and release its official non
beta version according to the generally accepted rules of semantic version ING,
since all versions of Noah prior to then had been less than 1.0 point.
Oh,
they were actually just some kind of beta,
or non public release,
despite some of them being LTs releases in 2015.
Io Dutch Oh yes,
released version one,
and once i o dot Js was merged back into node under the new umbrella organisation Node
released 4.0,
later that same year,
nodes rise to adoption has been unexpected and impressive,
But something happened during notes rise to fame,
something not quite worth celebrating and that is this many of the new breed of no Js
developers.
Those who adopted the platform after 2012 or so adopted the platform not because of nodes
runtime its Iot model that cli or it's a P I but because of its ecosystem,
in the speed and ease with which they could build applications with tools like express and
with the plethora of available in PM modules without having toe learn note itself or care
much about how it worked.
Today we have an entire generation of developers.
They know the means,
stack that no mongoose and underscore and angular in bootstrap,
and they build applications on node using these tools.
But they know virtually nothing of no Js itself.
You can see why the ecosystem,
not the a p I is what propelled node from a quiet backwater project to a mainstream
juggernaut.
NPM,
not node,
is what attracts most developers.
Mean not node is what many deaf specialize in mongoose,
not Mongo,
is met.
Many Debs understand how to integrate with this ecosystem of libraries and frameworks and
projects,
helped propel node to stardom and help the community gain so much.
But that doesn't mean we haven't lost something in return.
It's especially ironic that as the know J s a P I has been stabilizing and has finally
become a fully featured A p I that provides so much to developers out of the box,
developers have all but abandoned it in favor of the libraries and frameworks built on top
of it.
In the next lecture,
we start reversing that trend.
We're going to dive into the nuts and bolts of how no Js and its underlying V eight runtime
really work.